December 7, 1941, a date which will live in infamy.
We interrupt this broadcast bringing this important button from the United Press.
Slash, Washington, the White House announces a Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.
[Music.]
Hello and welcome to Veterans of the Valley.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Bill Adams wanted to be in the Air Force in 1950 and really had no designs on being a mechanic.
But that's where the Air Force needed him, so he learned the craft and for the next four years kept B-29s in the air.
Not in frigid Korea where the war was going on, but among other places in steaming hot Saudi Arabia.
Bill Adams is one of many veterans who served his country
not in combat, but in still needed jobs that kept America safe.
Please welcome Airman First Class Bill Adams to Veterans of the Valley.
Bill, it's a pleasure to have you on Veterans of the Valley, and thank you again for your service.
We had talked a little bit about
before we went on talking about as a kid growing up in Texarkana, age nine to 12 years old, that was when World War II was going on.
Talk a little bit about how the war was viewed in Texarkana when you were in the what, sixth, seventh, eighth grade?
About that time.
Right.
It was, everyone was very patriotic.
Everyone was trying to do their share, do their part to help the war effort.
We had the Victory Gardens.
We had the tire rationing.
We had the
In school, we bought our 10 cents to buy the war bonds and collected the 10 and things like that to put what they needed to help in the war effort.
I think I remember in my room, I kept a map of where the war was going on and I kept stick pins showing where the battles were taking place or where the front was expanding.
At that time, my dad did not have to go.
I would say he didn't have to go.
would have gone had they called him.
His job was driving a truck at Lone Star and Red River Ordnance.
He delivered, picked up ammunition while they were producing it and took it to the igloos where they were stored.
And, of course, one star spark and it might as well have been a war zone, you know.
But it turned out okay.
He did three years of doing that.
It was a time that...
Everybody pulled together.
It was a time that the whole country was of the same mindset.
Right, right, right, right.
And there were jobs, civilian jobs, that were considered essential to the war effort.
I know back then where the people who were in those jobs did not have to serve because of that.
You said your dad was a little bit older than most of the 19, 20-year-olds that were going off to war.
But you did have a couple of uncles who served, one in the Battle of the Bulge, right?
That's true.
And he was in combat in Europe.
served, I mean, four or five, whatever time when the war was over, he came out and then went back and went to OCS and retired as a major years later.
Right.
But the other uncle, he served in England.
I think he was in the supply corps and he kept the guys supplied what they needed over in Europe.
Meanwhile, you were growing up on the Arkansas side of Texarkana, and at age 18, you went into the Air Force.
That was in 1950.
Sorry to talk about that.
Okay, I did.
And with Sen, of course, like everyone, you go to Lackland Air Force Base.
There were a lot of guys at that time afraid they were going to get drafted, so a lot of them enlisted in the Air Force.
And we had, I was there for 10 days.
We had what we called Tent City.
They didn't have enough room for us in barracks.
So they moved a bunch of us up to Shepherd Air Force Base in Wichita Falls.
And I finished my basic training there.
And then from Shepherd, they took us to New Mexico Highlands University, who had a contract with the Air Force for A&E Mechanics and also a typewriter school.
That's in what you had in mind, though, when you entered the Air Force, right?
You didn't think you were going to be a wrench twister, right?
Well, that's true.
And, you know, the Air Force, they give you a battery test to see what you're suited for.
But that's not what they go by.
It's where they need you.
And they picked up our whole squadron, sent us out to New Mexico.
And I was there for 16 weeks in training.
And then they sent us to Laughlin, I'm sorry, Chenute Air Force Base in Rantoul, Illinois, to finish specialized training on the engines we'd be working on.
After five weeks there, we went to...
I was sent to the Seward Air Force Base, Smyrna, Tennessee, which is right outside of Nashville.
Right.
We were in an engine buildup shop.
We were building engines.
They would come in in a big can, and we would take them out and hang them up and drain what was in them to preserve them, put spark plugs on them, put whatever it needed on them, and get them set up on the stand.
And they were built for C-119s.
which was a cargo type plane, which carried troops.
And I was there for about six months.
And during this time, we had people that were being taken out about every two weeks and to go to Korea.
I had a friend of mine who worked in the orderly room and he came down one day and
I said he needed somebody to volunteer to go overseas.
And of course, my first question was, is it some place I might get shot at?
And he said, it's probably not likely.
And so, without thinking, I volunteered.
And I wound up in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.
Quite a ways from Inchon.
Quite a ways.
And of course, the main thing we fought over there was the temperature.
And you can understand now, you hear what it's like over in Iran and that area, and it's anywhere from
A cool night would be down in the 80s
A bad day would be 110 to 125.
Yeah.
And we would get up early in the morning, do the work on the airplanes, and then go back to our barracks, which we did have air conditioning at that time.
Right.
So during the heat of the day, we could be inside if we didn't have something really essential that we had to do.
Yeah.
Well, it was either ice cold in Korea, where you'd be shot at, or the heat in Saudi Arabia.
I guess of the two, you took the best.
I took the best.
It had air conditioning.
Anyway.
They needed the volunteers overseas.
Talk about Saudi Arabia.
This was, as we view Saudi Arabia now, we just like to think of flat, dust, and desert.
Well, that was pretty much where I was.
It was on the east side of Saudi Arabia, Dhahran.
It was a lot of desert there.
Now, Ramco had the Arabian American Oil Company had a big hangar there.
They had more airplanes than we did, actually.
And they had a compound that was about five miles north of us.
And we could go up there.
We were allowed to go up and go to the library and the restaurant and the theater that they had up there.
So that made it a little nicer.
The squadron that I joined was a detachment that was the 53rd Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron.
known as hurricane hunters, and we can tell you more about those later.
Our mission was to fly out of Dhahran north and then we'd turn east over across the top of Iran and fly south of Russia.
They had four B-29s, right?
They had four B-29s detachment there.
After flying across there, I think what we did was a normal air weather mission, just taking air samples, temperatures, dew points, whatever they do,
in those missions.
And our primary purpose was there as a spy mission, which I found out 20 years later after I've been there.
But I knew we had a big black tank that we carried in the bomb bay and it had a motor on it and it sucked air into the tank.
So in December of 52, when I was there, they did have a nuclear test
And we took the sample and it was sent to Washington.
To take care of spare time while I was over there, I did get a part time job.
I was in with special services and not like a special service fighting somebody.
It was special services in radio.
And I worked on Tuesdays, Thursdays and Saturdays in spare time.
at AFRD, which was the voice of the desert in Dhahran, Saudi Arabia.
You were a disc jockey.
A disc jockey is what it matters.
We had, where you had programs now, you get them on tape and this sort of thing.
We had big discs about this big around that we put on the turntable and it was a 30 minute program.
We could hear Bob Hope and we could hear all these different programs that they would send over to us at that time.
enjoyed hearing them.
And also we had played some records in between.
We had country and western music and other music.
I had a friend that was back in the States would send me a letter each week telling me what the top ten were.
And if we had that, we'd play open.
So that took some of the time to
take care of the border.
So when the on-air light came on, what did you talk about?
Did you talk about war news from Korea, news back in the United States, just anything you could come up with?
Just anything you could come up with.
If you had that information, where we were, we didn't get a lot of that information.
But it was just enough to keep the guys entertained and something going on.
Yeah, that's right.
Give them the same old weather forecast, going to be hot tomorrow.
Oh yeah, hot tomorrow, just like yesterday and the day coming.
So anyway, in December, after we got the information that we needed from the test that we had, we picked up the four airplanes and we went back to our headquarters.
At that time, headquarters was in Kinley Air Force Base, Bermuda.
Yeah, that's tough.
That was tough duty.
I bet.
Yes.
The weather got nicer for you.
The weather got much nicer, and the runway was right on the beach almost, and you could work on the airplane.
If you get a little bit warm, you go down and take a swim, come back and finish your work.
Yeah.
It was nice there.
It really was.
And then I was there until September of 53, and we moved our headquarters again, and this time we went to Burtonwood, England, which is up between Manchester and Liverpool, which is well up there.
And I got into the rain and the fog, so I've had all kinds of different weather that I've served in that four years I was there.
That's right.
But you decided about in 1954 that you didn't want to be a mechanic the rest of your life, so you took your discharge.
I took discharge and came out of southern England, and we had a ship that we boarded, a troop ship, called the USS General Upshur.
Right.
And I spent about eight of the most miserable days of my life on that ship, and I knew I would never want in the Navy because I was
Pretty sick coming across there.
You'd been flown everywhere else, every other detail that you had.
Every other assignment I went on here.
When you went home, they put you on a boat, sent you into a storm.
That's right.
And you were eating a lot of soda crackers.
A bunch.
That's the only thing I existed on for that time.
It's pretty tough.
I want to go back to the mission out of Saudi Arabia.
Talk just a little bit more about that.
Now, you're a mechanic.
You were keeping the planes in good order, keeping them in the air.
B-29 is a complicated machine.
Obviously, this is one of the most important aircraft of the World War II effort, also in Korea.
The Enola Gay was a B-29.
I mean, this is a big aircraft.
Was it a complicated aircraft to keep in the air?
It could be.
We had a lot of problem with keeping spark plugs running in it, and it was just a big airplane.
It took a lot of work and a lot of maintenance to keep them flying.
In fact, there's only one in the world today that's still flying.
Really?
And that one is with the Commemorative Air Force out in Midland, Texas.
I see.
And yeah, they just finished putting engines on that thing and several million dollars.
I don't know how the Air Force kept going broke just flying B-29s.
They burn a lot of gas and it takes a lot of work on them.
We had a regular, we had 16 aircraft in our squadron.
So we had to set up regular work maintenance.
and just rotate them as they needed work done on them.
We'd rotate them through their maintenance work.
Yeah, yeah.
I hope those engines last a while.
I don't know if four new engines will be in the new budget.
I'm not sure.
They don't think so.
Exactly.
Now, while we were in Bermuda, in, I believe it was in either August or September of 53, we had a hurricane evac, and the airplanes all came over to Columbia, South Carolina.
At that time, I was in New York at the time that this took place, and when they deployed and went back, going back to Bermuda, one of the aircraft had an engine problem.
The prop governor failed on it.
The right outboard prop actually oversped, came loose, and hit the other engine.
Of course, this was not a good situation.
Right.
I believe there were five people in the front of the airplane.
One of them got out.
There were six, I believe, in the rear.
All of them got out, but one was not found afterwards.
We don't know whether his chute failed or whether he just panicked or pulled under.
And they floated around out in the Atlantic that night.
And then the next day, an Exxon ship called Sea Train, Georgia,
picked them up and took them back to.
Fortunately for you, you were not on base at the time.
You were in New York City, I believe you said.
Had you been on base, you might likely have been on that plane.
Yes, because one of the people that was on the plane was off the crew of the airplane that I worked on.
I see.
It just happened to be that he was the one that was picked, and had I been there, I could have easily been the one that was picked to be on it.
So the good Lord was looking after me on that trip.
Indeed, indeed.
So after a four-year hitch, I guess, you were from 50 to 54?
Right.
Got out in 54, September 54.
Went to college in Texarkana.
Was it back to Texas County Junior College?
Yes.
You had gone, so you went back to school, because you had taken a semester there before you went in, right?
That's correct.
And so I went back and took some more, and again, working part-time in radio at two of the stations there, KOSY.
KTFS.
Right.
In Texarkana.
And then went from there to Hope, Arkansas and worked at KXAR for about six months and then decided the radio wasn't the thing I wanted to be in, so I applied.
You're telling me you can't get rich on radio.
Yeah, right.
I knew that.
The salesman and the owners get rich and the poor guy behind the mic is the one that's doing the work.
Anyway, I got a job with Eastern Airlines in Atlanta, Georgia.
I was there for two years and then transferred after I got married while I was there and transferred to Memphis, Tennessee, which was my wife at the time.
It was her home.
It was about 1958.
That was 58, right.
And then in 1963, I got a job with the FAA
in air traffic control. Air traffic control. I want to come back to that a minute because that's an interesting story about what that led to also. We've got just a few pictures here that I want to show that you've given to us to show but with the B-29, and then there there is a B-29 now talk about Specifically this one that attachment that's on the top of the plane. That one was where they took air samples in the top and they collected them and
What the main purpose was, well, of course, we did that in Saudi Arabia when they took the air samples, when they dropped the nuclear test.
We got that.
But there is a function that they use that for, and I'm not really sure at this point what the air weather people did with it.
But anyway, we had 16 of those aircraft.
This is a publicity photo.
You're not in this picture, but this is a publicity photo of a mechanics crew, right?
Yes, this picture, I understand, was taken in 1945 and just giving the mechanics a little bit of publicity and a little bit of what they need to show what their job was really important to the people to keep those things in the air.
That's great photography if that was truly, you know.
Now this, we're going to jump ahead a little bit in our story and you're going to tell us more about that later.
But right now you talked about the Confederate Air Force, which is now called the Commemorative Air Force.
And you're a member of that.
You used to
Yes.
Be a commander of that, right?
Last year I was commander of this.
Last year you were commander of that.
They're based out of Georgetown.
And this is your all's plane.
It's a B-25.
Right.
Actually, it represents a Marine squadron, VMB 612, which served in the South Pacific.
And we maintain and keep that airplane flying.
And in fact, in this coming June the 9th, when Coulter Field has their air show, they're having an open house,
We plan to have it here at that air show so everybody can see it and get a look at what those airplanes look like.
And you do, as a member of the commemorative Air Force, you still do work on that.
You still turn a wrench on that, right?
Still turn a wrench, still working on it, and fly to air shows on it, which I'll be going to one next week in Brownsville.
Right, right.
In 1963, and you touched on this, you got a job as an air traffic control in Memphis, and you were there for 19 years before you went to Houston.
No, I was there 10 years.
10 years, excuse me.
Yeah, that's 10 years before you went to Houston for eight and a half years.
Right.
Talk about that, air traffic control.
People think about that job.
It's considered one of the high-stress jobs that there is out there.
Did you find it that way?
Probably, like in radio, you can have a high-stress time and you can have where everything goes smooth.
We had those kind of days.
We'd have days where traffic was smooth and was light.
Our biggest days was usually on Friday and Sunday.
Fridays, you had the military going cross-country, you had the
Corporate people are coming home for the weekend, and then you have your regular air carriers that are flying all the time.
Right.
And then on Sunday, it was just reverse.
The military was coming back to their base.
The corporates were getting ready to go work, and you had your private aircraft in there, too.
So you were working all of them.
Yeah.
You were in Memphis.
Was FedEx in business then?
They were just getting ready to go in business when I left there.
I see.
So I didn't get into that, but I understand that a friend of mine that worked there
said at midnight it was the busiest airport in the country.
All of them coming in at one place and all of them leaving during that time.
And about four hours were just a real busy time.
Yeah, because when they first started up until just a few years ago, and I think they do it a little bit differently now, that if you send a package to your next door neighbor, that package went to Memphis first and then came back.
And it came back.
That's true.
Right, right.
I think they've got hubs now to where everything doesn't go to Memphis, but I remember that.
So then you went to Houston, same job.
Right.
for eight and a half years.
Eight and a half years.
There were some interesting things going on there at Houston.
I worked in an area down in the southwest.
I worked in Brownsville, Laredo, that area, and I worked aircraft out of Laredo Air Force Base, and it was not unusual to have a launch of a U-2 out of there, and he'd go up, he'd go off your frequency, and you wouldn't hear from him for another 10 or 12 hours, and he'd come back in wanting clearance to land, and you don't know where he'd been,
what he was doing, you can speculate, but you know how that goes.
Yeah, right.
And another interesting thing was that the SR-71, which was a spy plane, and nobody was supposed to know about it and see about it.
And I did get to work a few of those.
I see.
They would come out of somewhere, some altitude.
We could tell if they tell us a certain code word, we could tell how high they were.
And they would come down, they would do a refueling.
they would have a refueling track and then meet up with a C-135 refueler and between 24 and 25,000 feet and they'd go on that racetrack and refuel and then they'd cut loose from their fueler and then they'd go back to wherever they were doing and whatever they were doing and I have tracked them
Of course, this is slow for them at 1,700 miles an hour across our radar scope.
And it was very interesting to talk to him.
You put him on one center frequency, and he flew the whole center frequency.
If he was changing the frequency every time he went to a new sector, that's all he could do, changing the frequency.
He'd go through so fast.
But it was interesting, and I thoroughly enjoyed it.
Until it ended, in 1981, and a lot of people, of course, know you were one of the
12,000 who were fired by President Reagan.
That's true.
Not too many people can make a statement that when you get fired, you go all to the top.
That's right.
Fired by the president.
It was a lose-lose situation.
If you did go out, we weren't sure we were going to get fired, but we did.
If you stayed in and the others that did go out and then the strike had been settled, then you're sitting there working with the guys that had gone out and with the type of job, that
kind, you can really make it unpleasant for somebody.
So I was able to get into criminal justice and got into adult probation in Montgomery County.
And I worked there until 94, which I retired from there.
And I didn't retire.
I retired from that job.
I didn't retire.
After that, I was managing some apartments for about four years, and then about 18 months in Mexico, and then moved up to, came back to Mexico.
My daughter lives here.
In fact, she works with the 12-man foundation here on campus.
And I moved in with her.
I had been single for some time.
And you found new life.
I found new life, sure did.
Yes, with a new person.
That's right, that's right.
Talk about that, because you were attending your aunt's 89th birthday program, right?
Right, out at Curtin.
She lived at Curtin.
And I went to her 89th birthday and met my wife to be there.
And our first date was an air show in Georgetown, Texas.
Of course it was.
Did she want to go?
Oh, yeah.
In fact, she's a member of the community of Air Force now.
But it's been a good life since then.
Unfortunately, my aunt passed away in November of last year at age 99.
Wonderful life.
And had a wonderful life.
Sure did.
In the meantime, I've gotten involved in a few things here in the community.
Yeah.
I am on the City Council Curtin.
I'm a member of the Brazos Valley Veterans Memorial Executive Board, Crime Stoppers Executive Board, and very involved with American Legion, which is a great organization for some of these new guys that are coming back from overseas getting their discharges or that are here that can get into it.
There's a lot of benefits for the veterans
that we can help them with.
We have a service officer that helps them fill out paperwork and other things they need.
So we'd highly recommend them get involved and also invite them to our 8 o'clock Thursday morning coffee every week from 8 to 10 and get to meet a lot.
They don't have to be a veteran to be there.
I mean, they don't have to be a member of the American Legion to be there.
Just sit around and tell stories.
As a matter of fact, that's where I met you a couple of weeks ago.
That's right.
We arranged this interview at that Thursday morning breakfast over at the American Legion.
Well, that's great that you stay involved.
And your wife, Kathy, is a member of the Auxiliary of the American Legion.
She is.
And she stays very, very involved, too.
She does.
Right, right.
So when you look back at your experience, again, you weren't a combat veteran, but certainly you served a very essential need, and you've got to feel that way.
I do.
And the squadron I was in, the 53rd Strategic Reconnaissance Squadron, as I say, was known as the Hurricane Hunters.
They are now stationed in Keesner Air Force Base in Biloxi, Mississippi.
And they're still doing the same type of work.
Right.
We did fly a different kind of profile in the hurricanes.
I understand the way they fly, they fly into it and kind of make an X and go back across it.
The B-29, we got on the outside of the hurricane, the same rotation that it was going and just moved in closer and closer to the middle and we got into the eye of the hurricane.
And at that point, the eye might be 20 miles across, you know, so then they would climb out and go out the top of it, but they wouldn't have to go through that again.
And they fly C-130s, right?
C-130s now, yes.
Which is turboprops.
The turboprops.
That's right.
You play golf or anything?
No, I guess my hobby mostly is with the community of Air Force and American Legion involved with that sort of thing.
Right, and you said in June, out of Coulter, there's going to be... There is an open house, and everyone is invited to come out.
They're making some great plans.
I'm kind of working with them since I live here and getting the B-25 over here.
And they're going to have some...
other military aircraft that will be coming in, replicas, and also we're trying to get some helicopters from, say, from Conroe or from Fort Hood to be here.
Right.
That's June of 2011, I want to tell folks that
Uh-huh, June the 9th.
Yeah, June the 9th of 2011, because you may be watching this show as a new show or a little bit later on.
So that'll be coming up at Colter Field.
Thank you very much for your service, and thanks for being our guest.
It's my pleasure.
I appreciate it, Bill.
Besides turning wrenches on the B-29s, Bill Adams is active with the American Legion, Earl Graham Post, and Brian, where his wife, Kathy, is a member of the Auxiliary there.
And we thank him and we salute him for his service, not only on American soil, but the far reaches of the globe.
I'm Tom Turbiville.
Be sure and join us next time on Veterans of the Valley.
[Silence.]
[Music.]
27:55.000 -> 28:05.000